---
layout: post
title: Make Common Lisp format function into Rust
---

Someday, I want to use the `format` funcion inside my Rust. So I think I can write it by myself. And someone else can use it and feel a bit Lisp (just a tiny bit). 

After read some articles and study a bit, I usually just use it rather than look close enough to try to make a copy, I figured out there are two big parts I need to make separatly. One is control string, one is arguments input. And reveal them after all. 

I have to say, I thought it should be easy. But nothing is easy when put my hands dirty and facing those details. So, let the journey start.

## Control String ##

When I start with control string, there are things in my mind. First, control string should be make once and use several times. So it is the structure instance that including all matters. Second, it should keep all symbols (like `~a`) and their types (I should define them) inside too.

### Define Types ###

Let me define the type first. Thanks to Rust's very generous type system. I define `TildeKind` enum type like:

```rust
pub enum TildeKind {
    /// ~a
    Va,
	/// there are more kinds too
}
```

I do this because it can easily add new enum members inside and I can focues on one special member for developing the MVP of that member.

There are a lot "TildeKind" in common lisp standard, TBH, I even don't there are such many. Until I write this post, I only implenmented the nessary and the ones I use a lot.

### Parser ###

As the part of control string part, there should be one parsing function can make string to the list of `TildeKind`. Then I can let control string struct keep the `TildeKind` inside and reveal with the arguments. 

At first, I make a parse function as the entrance of all parsers detemining. 

```rust
pub fn parse(c: &mut Cursor<&'_ str>) -> Result<Self, TildeError> {
    let parser = Self::scan_for_kind(c)?;
    parser(c)
}
```

It receive the Cursor type which is using in a lot parsing and scanning string operations. Then `scan_for_kind` will return a function that which parser function should do the job. This is the `scan_for_kind`

```rust
fn scan_for_kind(
    c: &mut Cursor<&'_ str>,
) -> Result<
    Box<dyn for<'a, 'b> Fn(&'a mut std::io::Cursor<&'b str>) -> Result<Tilde, TildeError>>,
    TildeError,
> {
	//
	// some check 
	//

    match buf {
        [b'a', ..] | [b'A', ..] => {
            c.seek(SeekFrom::Current(-buf_offset))
                .map_err(|e| TildeError::new(ErrorKind::ParseError, e.to_string()))?; // back to start
            return Ok(
                #[rustc_box]
                Box::new(Self::parse_value),
            );
        },
		...
}
```

It returns the function of parser and box them for outside calling. Yea, I can just call them inside this function, but control string should be generate just once so I don't think optimization is that matter here.

## Wait, let's think a bit ##

After a lot hard code parser function. I start to think how the traits design I want. I would like it use it like in lisp. Flexible enough and switch the behavior in runtime. Because it have to choose the behaviour in runtime, so it has to be some `Box<T>` magic. If it is `~a` in control string, when it used in somewhere functions, the type it reveal is unknown. It can be string, it can be i32, it can be everything. 

And I have to connect them with the `TildeKind` I defined. It is fun to think about this design.

## Traits ##

I was thinking make every memebers inside the `TildeKind` enum has its own trait to reveal. Which means I give the ability of fine control that which types implenment which trait. 

For example, `TildeKind::Va` will pair with the trait `TildeKindVa`, then every types which implenmented the `TildeKindVa` can be reveal as `~a`. This design make same type can be reveal as multiple `TildeKind`. Like `String` can be `~a` and `~S`, just implenment `String` with `TildeKindVa` and `TildeKindStandard`. 

Then the quesion is: how can I make sure the type is implenment the speciafic trait? I was thinking type impenment the reveal trait, like `TildeKindVa`, should also implenment the `Tildeable` trait to check if this type has implenmented the reveal trait.

Like

```rust
// has to derive to Debug
#[derive(Debug)]
struct MyStruct {
    a: usize,
    b: String,
}

trait TildeAble {
	fn into_tildekind_va(&self) -> Option<&dyn TildeKindVa> {
        Some(self)
    }
}

impl TildeAble for MyStruct {
	// ~a is good enough
	fn into_tildekind_va(&self) -> Option<&dyn TildeKindVa> {
        Some(self)
    }
}
```

Then when I reveal it, I check the `into_tildekind_va` first, and reveal it as the `TildeKindVa`.

After this design, I actully also make the feature automaticlly that custom structure can be reveal by `cl-format`. 

## Macros ##

After finish the design, `TildeKind` have connected with the `TildeAble` and there definatly a lot hard code to generate the connections. Wait, did I just say generate? Sounds like use macro is the good way to do this job. 

I am thinking to make a derive macro and generate the reveal macros and implenment `tildeable` to some types.

Fortunately I have played around the macros before. That's the good news. The bad news is: `syn` package updated to version 2 (which I learn it when it version 1). And the example and turitals online mostly are outdate. After a lot try and test. I finally done the macro side.

Proc macro [code](https://github.com/ccqpein/cl-format-rs/blob/b3819555e36ea63f1042f834e6f67f4e259ce1d5/cl-format-macros/src/lib.rs#L89) get the all memebers in `TildeKind` and generate their reveal trait (like `Va` -> `TildeKindVa`) and give default "unimplenment" error, make the `TildeAble` trait, implenment `TildeAble` to the types in the derive arguments `implTo`.

For example, the `TildeKind` like this:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, PartialEq, TildeAble)]
pub enum TildeKind {
    /// ~a
    #[implTo(float, char, String)]
    Va,
}
```

will expand to:

```rust
trait TildeAble {
    fn len(&self) -> usize;
    fn into_tildekind_va(&self) -> Option<&dyn TildeKindVa>{None}
}

/// impl arguments in derive macro 

impl TildeAble for char {
    fn into_tildekind_va(&self) -> Option<&dyn TildeKindVa> {
        Some(self)
    }
}

impl TildeAble for float {
    fn into_tildekind_va(&self) -> Option<&dyn TildeKindVa> {
        Some(self)
    }
}

impl TildeAble for String {
    fn into_tildekind_va(&self) -> Option<&dyn TildeKindVa> {
        Some(self)
    }
}

/// generate the reveal trait

trait TildeKindVa {
    fn format(&self, tkind: &TildeKind, buf: &mut String) -> Result<(), TildeError> {
        Err("un-implenmented yet".into())
    }
}
```

## Arguments ##

Now I have the TildeKind parser, and I done the trait design. The next step is to implenment the reveal traits with a lot types. TL;DR, after a lot testing and coding, I figure out I need special "Arguments" type. At the first design, `Args` just another name of `Vec<&dyn TildeAble>`. Then, when I implenmenting the `Vec<&dyn TildeAble>`, the `TildeKind::Cond`, and the `TildeKind::Loop`, I noticed I need some type pair with the control string type at the upper level, and wrap all arguments before reveal.

```rust
pub struct Args<'a> {
    len: usize,
    inner: Vec<&'a dyn TildeAble>,
    ind: RefCell<usize>,
}
```

In `Args` struct, it keep the length and the ind (which means index) of the arguments. So it can handle the special loop and condition tilde kinds.

## Optimization ##

### Helper macro ###

### Memory allocation ###

