---
layout: post
title: Advent of Code 2023 journey
---

The AoC 2023 is finished! As the last year, I am going to record how is my AoC 2023 journey going in this post. This year I seek a lot helps from my friends in the chatting group we made last year, and the genious on Reddit. Truly learn a lot, like the several algorithms I didn't even heard about before. 

## Day 1 & 2 & 3 & 4##

The first day I was writing in rust and common lisp at the beginning. The code part is straightforward enough. I was still writing my parser by myself until my friend mention Regex Expression. I am so stupid, why I hadn't thought about it? So I re-wrote my day2 input parse with regex lib. In commaon lisp, I need to learn the `cl-ppcre` lib. 

After that, the day 3 and day 4, I was using regex to write parser and I am pretty like it. 

## Day 5 ##

My brute force way cannot work this time. Because SBCL on my M2 Silicon MBP give the `Heap exhausted (no more space for allocation)` error. It is weird that I didn't see the memory usage is that huge. So I call the help from my friend and re-write the major logic by caching more parts. And finally finish it with two stars.

## Day 6 ##

Day 6 it is interesting that I actually don't need the code to finish it. I can just solve quadratic inequality in one variable and give the answer directly. However, I forgot how to solve it now. It has been a looooong time from joniour high school. So I code to solve the part1. But part2, I google one online calculate to get the answer. 

## Day 7 ##

Need to make my own sort function and just replace it inside the `sort` function in lisp. I remember last year has the same type question. It is good for languages that can define the custome sort functions.

## Day 8 ##

Misunderstanding the input take me while to debug. It let me noticed that I need to check input too. It actually help me in day 20.

## Day 9 ##

My input parser forgot the negtive number, change from `\d+` to `-?\d+` just fix it.

## Day 10 ##

Day 10 is the day that difficulty incressing. The thing I learned from last year AoC called flood filling, I was trying to use it in this day's part2. But it doesn't work. Then I find a trick that when I scan a line, if they pass one direction, the empty spots after it are included, until reach the edge of other direction. It is tricky, I pretty sure it has some other algorithm like day18. But I hadn't check.

## Day 11 ##

Day 11 is straight forward.

## Day 12 ##

I am trying to make regex groups and match the inputs. But it doesn't work. I go to reddit and find one guy use the regex too. But instead of matching the whole line, he match groups one by one of each line. And it works. 

## Day 13 ##

Part 2 I need to return the whole possible row/col rather than the first one. Because the first one might be the old one which I don't want it. 

## Day 14 ##

After several updates of my AoC map tool. Day 14 is straight forward enough to solve. In part 1, I think it is the offset trick but actually it just map generation. 

## Day 15 and 16 ##

Straight forward

## Day 17 ##

I love lisp, but keep several tables as the cache of dynamic programming is frustrated. I write several versions on day 17 and eventually, I translate from my friend's python code. Looks like in-functional languages saving a lot mental enregy. And translate from his code isn't hard at all. 

## Day 18 ##

From day 18, things are becoing more interesting. Part 1 of day 18, I finally have change to use the flood filling algorithm. Expand the whole map with one up row, one down row, one left col and one right col. Then start from the `(-1 -1)` and try to flood filling the map. 

Part2 make the input huge and cannot use the same logic. After chatting with my friends and searching on reddit. I get the algorithm named shoelace. And I heard it should pair with the algorithm Pick, but I didn't use it. I should learn it. It looks fun. 

## Day 19 ##

Had been affected by last year’s puzzle that making the lisp expression from input and eval and get the answer. I took a long time to write the lambda functions with conditions from input on this year's day19. Part 1 done. And part 2 I need DFS with few changes with all **ranges** as inputs. And pick out all possible ranges. 

## Day 20 ##

Part 1 takes me a lot time because I am sleepy. Luckily, some designs I choose make part 2 easier. Part 2, I need to check the input and figure out the inputs of the `&` node that send sig to the end (`rx`) will repeat. There are four of them, I print out and find their repeat steps. Then run LCM all of them. And day 20 part 2 I jump into 2000 on leaderboard. I think it is my best this year (except the day 25 part2)

## Day 21 ##



## End ##

Some algorithms I want to learn because I haven't heard them before and they are looks fun.

+ Shoelace & Pick for calculating the area inside the circle.
