---
layout: post
title: 2023 review
---

Today is the last day of 2023, and I think I should review how my development has progressed this year.

As usual, I've kept my current projects up-to-date whenever I had new ideas. Additionally, I started some new projects too. Mostly, I learned new stuff and included those demos in my demo repository.

## AI Stuff ##

OpenAI and its ChatGPT became a very hot topic from the end of last year to this year. I updated my telegram-bot to support ChatGPT. In November, with the release of the new model, I also began to use the function call for my bot and split it from the whole Rust app to a Rust app with an OpenAI Python agent.

## Sea-ORM ##

In the process of updating my telegram-bot, I needed to use a database to store the data rather than just keeping it in memory. So, I learned how to use Sea-ORM with SQLite.

## code-it-later-rs Stuff ##

As one of my long-standing projects, I continued to add new features to it. I also wrote my first [emacs mode](https://github.com/ccqpein/helm-code-it-later) for it.

### code-it-later-rs Itself ###

I added the JSON format output and introduced a restore command to revert the 'crumbs' back to standard comments.

### code-it-later-rs Emacs Mode ###

It was a fun journey learning how to write an Emacs mode using one of the best frameworks in the Emacs community. I've already written a [blog](https://ccqpein.me/Make-my-first-emacs-mode-for-code-it-later-with-helm-framework/) about it.

## cl-format-rs ##

My favorite project this year is [cl-format-rs](#). It started from a small idea and became a fully-fledged tool. This way, I'm able to use the Common Lisp format function in Rust (sort of).

The process of developing this tool was enjoyable because I needed to design and manage a lot of dynamic traits. I also wrote a [blog](https://ccqpein.me/Make-Common-Lisp-format-function-into-Rust/) about it.

## Leptos Learning ##

Another topic I delved into this year is the Leptos framework. I always wanted to learn about WebAssembly. I'm just not really into front-end development, I guess. So this time, I started with Leptos and made a snake game for the front-end. It's good enough for me. The Discord channel was a great help. I should continue learning it, create some WebAssembly without writing any JavaScript; that's good for me.

## AoC 2023 ##

Last but not least, the Advent of Code 2023. I've also written a [blog](https://ccqpein.me/Advent-of-Code-2023-journey/) about it.

## Conclusion ##

As long as I learn something new and create something, I'm happy with it. I have some ideas about what I should learn next year.
